

===== PAGE 1 =====
TALKPLAYDATA2: ANAGENTICSYNTHETICDATA
PIPELINE FORMULTIMODALCONVERSATIONAL
MUSICRECOMMENDATION
Keunwoo Choi∗, Seungheon Doh∗, Juhan Nam
KAIST
{keunwoo.choi, seungheondoh, juhan.nam}@kaist.ac.kr
ABSTRACT
We present TalkPlayData 2, a synthetic dataset for multimodal conversational
music recommendation generated by an agentic data pipeline. In the proposed
pipeline, multiple large language model (LLM) agents are created under various
roles with specialized prompts and access to different parts of information, and the
chat data is acquired by logging the conversation between the Listener LLM and
the Recsys LLM. To cover various conversation scenarios, for each conversation,
the Listener LLM is conditioned on a finetuned conversation goal. Finally, all
the LLMs are multimodal with audio and images, allowing a simulation of multi-
modal recommendation and conversation. In the LLM-as-a-judge and subjective
evaluation experiments, TalkPlayData 2 achieved the proposed goal in various as-
pects related to training a generative recommendation model for music.1
1 INTRODUCTION
Conversational recommendation systems provide recommendations through a natural language dia-
log with users, requiring both multi-turn recommendation capabilities and natural language response
generation (Goker & Thompson, 2000; Christakopoulou et al., 2016; Zhang et al., 2018). At each
turn, these systems predict ranked lists of relevant music tracks based on conversation history and
user queries while understanding preferences, context, and diverse query types. Beyond recom-
mendation, systems generate engaging responses that describe recommendations and assist users in
music exploration through natural language explanations (Doh et al., 2024). For example, in the mu-
sic domain, early approaches leveraged dense embeddings to find appropriate music by computing
similarity between multi-turn history embeddings and item embeddings (Chaganty et al., 2023; Doh
et al., 2024; Melchiorre et al., 2025), although these methods suffered from architectural limitations
on generating natural responses.
The main blockers for developing such a system may have been the lack of large-scale and high-
quality datasets. For example, CPCD, a human-curated dataset, consists of only 917 conversations
in total (Chaganty et al., 2023). Recent studies, such as Talk The Walk, LP-MusicDialog, and
TalkPlay (Leszczynski et al., 2023; Doh et al., 2024; 2025), have been proposed to address this
issue by actively adopting language models. Essentially, those methods consists of two stages:
determining a music sequence and generating corresponding utterances. In (Leszczynski et al.,
2023), the music sequence is determined based on several similarity assumptions, while in (Doh
et al., 2024; 2025), it is determined by cascaded attribute filtering among a pool of music (a playlist).
Then, based on the music sequence, a language model provides plausible utterance between a system
and a user.
While the recent methods and their datasets have initiated developing and evaluating conversational
music recommendation systems, there is room for improvements on various aspects. First, the two-
stage process is an convenient design choice to generate the data and does not resemble a realistic
scenario of conversations between a music recommender and a user. For example, at turn 1, the lan-
guage model already completely knows the future music sequence, which could affect the utterances
∗KC and SD made equal contribution.
1TalkPlayData 2 and its generation code are released athttps://talkpl-ai.github.io.
1
arXiv:2509.09685v5  [cs.IR]  2 Jun 2026

===== PAGE 2 =====
of both the system and the user. Second, none of the methods are multimodal, unlike how listeners
perceive and consume music in the real world. Third, there is not any component for personal-
ization. Fourth, those datasets lack of extra labels or information such as user preferences on the
recommendation or any reasoning step behind the recommendations, both of which can be crucial
components in modern recommendation systems. Fifth and finally, in each dataset, all the conversa-
tions are generated based on the same assumptions – determining the music sequence is done by the
same logic, and generating the utterance is done with the same prompt. This could lead to a mode
collapse, i.e., every conversation may represent the same music recommendation scenario.
Those limitations motivate the development of the proposed pipeline and the datasets: TalkPlay-
Data 2. The goal of TalkPlayData 2 is to provide conversation data for music recommendation
research that coversvarious conversation scenariosand involvesmultimodalaspects of music. The
architectural design choice is made to generate the data in a realistic scenario that resembles the
real-world recommendation. TalkPlayData 2 also includes the user preference and reasoning mes-
sages for each turn, enabling to optimize a system not only to mimic the data, but also to maximize
the user satisfaction. Finally, TalkPlayData 2 provides basic user profiles for each conversation.
2 COREIDEA
y=f θ(xprof ile, xgoal, xmusic)(1)
A simplified formulation of the creation process for a data point of TalkPlayData 2 is Equation 1,
fis the creation pipeline,θindicates the model weights of the involved LLM,x prof ile is a lis-
tener’s demographic information and preferences,x goal represents the conversation objectives and
scenarios, andx music is a set of music data, covering text, audio, and image modalities.yindicates
the outcome, a multi-turn conversation between the listener and the recommendation system about
music discovery, consisting of queries, music items, and responses.
2.1 GROUNDINGMUSICDATA,x music
To achieve factual data generation, TalkPlayData 2 is primarily based on a source dataset for the
details about music items,x music. In other words,y music, the recommended tracks, must be merely
a result of sequential selections ofx music, the recommendation pool. More details about the source
data are provided in subsection 3.1. The music datax music is a set of loosely relevant music items,
e.g., music tracks in a listening session in this paper (equivalent to playlists as in Doh et al. (2025)).
It is provided with a rich set of metadata, tags, lyrics, audio, and images.
LFM-2B Single
Listening
Session
Profiling Tracks
Recommendation
Pool
Profile LLM
Goal LLM
System
Prompt
Listener
Profile
Conversation
Goal
Listener
Profile
System
PromptRecommendation
Pool
Turn 1 
Query
Turn 1
Response
...
Turn 8 
Query
Turn 8
Response
Conversation
- Turn 1 query
- Turn 1 response
..
- Turn 8 query
- Turn 8 response
TalkPlayData 2
collect
Stage 1. Profile and Goal Generation
Stage 2. Conversation Generation
split
Profiling Tracks
Conversation
Goal
User Infosample
Listener LLM
Recsys LLM
Figure 1: Overview of TalkPlayData 2 pipeline, consisting of four LLMs with specialized roles.
2

===== PAGE 3 =====
Table 1: LLM Capabilities Utilized in TalkPlayData 2 Generation
Capability Details
Musical Aspect
Entity Recognition Names of artists, albums, and tracks (Hachmeier & Jäschke (2024))
Domain Knowledge Key, chord, and tempo (Zhou et al. (2024); Li et al. (2024b))
User Simulation User profiles and goals (Zhang et al. (2025))
Multimodal Understanding
Text Lyrics, tags (Vasilakis et al. (2024)), conversations (Kwon et al. (2024))
Audio Music audio signals (Gardner et al. (2023))
Image Album art images (Hayashi et al. (2024))
Agentic Interaction
Instruction Following Adhering to recommendation constraints and producing responses
Goal Achievement Achieving provided goals through multi-turn conversations
Chain-of-Thought Generating intermediate ‘thought’ sentences to reflect and plan
2.2 DATAGENERATIONAGENTS,f={g goal, gprof ile, glistener, grecsys}
The creation systemfis formed by multiple LLM sessions, i.e., a set of agents, each of which has
a role – as a listener profiler (Profile LLM,g prof ile), a conversation goal setter (Goal LLM,g goal),
a listener (Listener LLM,g listener), and a recommendation system (Recsys LLM,g recsys). This
agentic approach presents several advantages compared to relying on a single LLM session such as
Doh et al. (2025). Most critically, it systematically prevents the agent from ‘cheating’ by looking
at the data provided to other roles. This makes the data generation process highly realistic. For
example, a conversation goal is shared with the Listener LLM so that it generates relevant queries to
the Recsys LLM and achieves its goal. However, the goal is not shared with the Recsys LLM, whose
role is to guess the goal of the Listener LLM through conversation. This approach also provides the
role, task, and behavior instructions to each LLM with high clarity, leading to generate high-quality
data. This is well-aligned with the recent multi-agent systems such as Fellowship of the LLMs (Arif
et al., 2024), MAG-V (Sengupta et al., 2024), and AgentSGEN (Xuan et al., 2025), where dedicated
roles improved semaantic fidelity and reduces mode collapse.
2.3 THEUTILIZEDCAPABILITIES OFLLMS,θ
Besides grounding music data, the generation process of TalkPlayData 2 fully relies on various
capabilities of LLMs encoded in its weightθ, as in Table 1. Not only do the text-based capabilities
need to be strong, but the multimodality of LLMs is also essential for the successful creation of
TalkPlayData 2 to simulate recommendation systems and listeners who can see and listen to music.
Table 1 summarizes the details of important capabilities, which are unblocked by the recent progress
of LLMs.
2.4 USERPROFILE ANDCONVERSATIONGOAL,x prof ile ANDx goal
Although the LLM generation process is often stochastic, it is well-known that naively sampling
multiple times does not lead to diversifying the generation outcomes. Rather, a mode collapse often
occurs, where the generated texts become too similar to each other in style and logic (Wang et al.
(2025); Chen et al. (2025)). We observed this in our preliminary experiment - even when using
different music items, the generated conversations had very similar styles. To address this issue,
we utilize user demographic information and pre-defined conversation goals to generate diverse
conversations. Furthermore, utilizing Goal LLM and Profile LLM, we enhancex prof ile andx goal
to be more suitable for recommending musicx music, enabling the generation of more diverse and
realistic conversations. The details are provided in subsection 3.2.
3

===== PAGE 4 =====
Algorithm 1Data Generation Process for Multi-modal Music Recommendation Conversations
Require:Listening sessionsS, Set of tracksM, User ProfileU, Conversation GoalG, Query
messageQ, Recommended MusicM t, ResponseR, ThoughtT, Progress Towards GoalP
1:foreach listening sessionswith|M| ≥21tracksdo
2:M prof ile ←sample 5 tracks ofM
3:M pool ←sample 16-32 tracks ofM−M prof ile
4:U base ←user demographic information ofs(age, country, gender)
5:G base ←sample 3 templates from goal dictionary
6:U f inal ←ListenerProfileLLM(U prof ile,U base)
7:G f inal ←ConversationGoalLLM(G base,M pool,U f inal)
8:Q 1 ←ListenerLLM(U f inal,G f inal,M prof ile)▷First query message (Q 1)
9:T t
1,M 1, R1 ←RecsysLLM(P f inal,T pool,Q 1)▷First track (M 1), response (R1)
10:conversation←[Q 1, M1, R1]
11:forturnt= 2to8do
12:P t, T l
t ,Q t ←ListenerLLM(U f inal,G f inal,M prof ile,conversation)
13:conversation.append(Q t)
14:T r
t ,M t, Rt ←RecsysLLM(U f inal,M pool,conversation)
15:conversation.append(M t Rt)
3 THECREATIONSTEPS OFTALKPLAYDATA2
3.1 OVERVIEW
Base DatasetThe foundation of TalkPlayData 2 is the LFM-2b dataset (Schedl et al. (2022)),
which provides session-based music listening history data of over 120,000 users spanning more than
15 years (February 2005 to March 2020). Beyond basic metadata (track, album, artist name), LFM-
2b provides rich additional information including user demographic data (country, gender, age),
last.fm genre/style annotations, and ID mappings to Spotify track identifiers. Additional multimodal
information is acquired through the provided Spotify track identifiers and the API – preview audio
snippets, album art images, release dates, and popularity metrics (as of 2025 July). Finally, we used
pretrained music information retrieval models to estimate rich information: Madmom (Böck et al.
(2016)) for tempo, key, and chords as well as Whisper (Radford et al. (2023)) for lyrics.
Data SplitTo reflect real-world recommendation scenarios, we performed a chronological data
split. Sessions after 2019 were reserved for testing, while earlier sessions were used for training.
To create the multimodal conversation dataset, we filter listening history sessions to include only
tracks with Spotify track identifier mappings. Furthermore, to address cold-start user and cold-start
item scenarios, we carefully sampled the test set conversations. Out of 1,000 test set conversations,
800 were sampled from the warm user pool, while 200 were sampled from the cold user pool.
During sampling, we ensured balanced sampling across demographic attributes - country, gender,
and age groups. This balanced sampling helps evaluate the model’s performance across diverse user
segments. Detailed statistics are provided in section 4.
Large Language ModelsThe Google Gemini 2.5 Flash (gemini-2.5-flash, Comanici et al.
(2025)) is chosen to create TalkPlayData 2. Google Gemini is the only available LLM API that
supports the three modalities of TalkPlayData 2, and their models have demonstrated strong music
understanding capabilities in various benchmarks (Ghosh et al., 2025; Carone et al., 2025a;b; Lee
et al., 2025; He et al., 2025; Kumar et al., 2025; Ma et al., 2025). In the preliminary experiments,
there seem noticeable performance gaps between Gemini 2.5 Flash and its ‘Lite’ version when it
comes to music understanding. The 2.5 Pro version, the most advanced version of Google Gemini
as of 2025 Aug, was not chosen for two reasons: it is about 3-4 times more expensive, and a more
advanced LLM is needed for the LLM-as-a-judge evaluation (subsection 4.3).
3.2 GENERATIONPROCESS
The overall process iterates over the listening sessionsSand converts each sessions∈Sinto a
conversation. Each sessionsconsists of a list of tracksMand basic user demographic information
4

===== PAGE 5 =====
U, including age group, gender, and country. For each conversation, we require sessions containing
at least 21 tracks to ensure a sufficient recommendation pool. From each session, 5 tracks are
sampled as profiling tracks (M prof ile) to inform the conversation style sampling, while another
16-32 tracks form the recommendation pool (Mpool).
For a single conversation, four separate LLM sessions are created, each of which corresponds to
gprof ile,g goal,g listener, andg recsys, respectively. Their instructions are carefully designed after
many iterations of reviews and updates to ensure correct behaviors and response formats. As out-
lined in Algorithm 1 and Figure 1, the overall generation process consists of two stages: i) profiling
and goal generation, and ii) conversation generation. During the first stage (lines 1-8), we create a
user profileU f inal based on profiling tracksM prof ile and demographic informationU base; and a
conversation goalG f inal from base goal templatesG base, recommendation poolM pool, and user
profileU f inal. This customization is responsible for diversifying the conversation in style. The
conversation generation stage (lines 11-15) follows with alternating API calls between the listener
and the recommendation systems, where queriesQ t, music recommendationsM t, and responses
Rt build upon the conversation history while maintaining coherence with the conversation goals
Gf inal. The detailed instructions and responses for the LLMs are provided in Appendix B.
Listener Profile LLMThe role of the Listener Profile LLM is to analyze the profiling tracks and
infer high-level preference information of the listener, given demographic information, such as gen-
der, age group, and country. During generating TalkPlayData 2 as well as using it, this information
provides the personalization aspect, which is crucial in modern recommendation systems and music
consumption (Schedl et al. (2021); Kaminskas & Ricci (2012); North & Hargreaves (2008)). The
LLM combines the provided demographic profile with the track analysis to estimate musical prefer-
ences including preferred musical culture, top artist, and top genre. All the text data (metadata, tags,
and lyrics), audio, and image data described in subsection 3.1 are provided to the LLM.
Conversation Goal LLM
The Conversation Goal defines the session-level goal that the listener wants to achieve through con-
versation with the recommendation system. To guarantee the overall diversity of the conversations
in TalkPlayData 2, a diverse set of conversation goals is needed; while each conversation goal should
be plausible given the recommendation pool (Li et al. (2024a)). Before the generation process, a set
of 44 conversation goal templates is prepared. A template is defined by two properties, the topic
and the specificities. In total, 11 topics are defined to cover various types of multi-modal music
discovery conversations, as listed in Table 3. These topics decide which aspect of music the conver-
sation will be based on and cover recommendation scenarios based on audio (Deldjoo et al. (2024);
Van den Oord et al. (2013), lyrics (Patra et al. (2017); Vystr ˇcilová & Peška (2020)), visual infor-
mation (Saito & Itoh (2011); Libeks & Turnbull (2011)), and emotion (Han et al. (2010)). The
specificities define how specific the query and the target music are, resulting in 4 cases as in Table 3.
This two-dimensional formalization of LL, HL, LH, and HH provides a structured view of recom-
mendation scenarios such as exploratory search (Marchionini (2006); Schedl et al. (2015)), lookup
tasks (Marchionini (2006)), and query granularity (Sun & Zhang (2018); Jannach et al. (2021).
Table 2: Conversation Goal Axis 1 - Topics
Code Description Example
A Audio-Based Discovery “Discover songs with immersive soundscapes”
B Lyrical Discovery “Songs about love”
C Visual-Musical Connections “Music that looks colorful and vibrant”
D Contextual & Situational “Music for working and studying”
E Interactive Refinement “Let’s play hard rock and transit to modern rock”
F Metadata-Rich Exploration “Find multiple songs from the Hamilton musical”
G Mood & Emotion-Based “I need something to cheer me up”
H Artist & Discography Discovery “Tell me about this artist’s other works”
I Cultural & Geographic “Music from Alaska”
J Social & Popularity Context “What’s trending right now?”
K Temporal & Era Discovery “Music from the 80s please”
5

===== PAGE 6 =====
Table 3: Conversation Goal Axis 2 - Specificities
Code Description Example
LL Low query specificity
Low target specificity
“Play some chill music”
(Many tracks are possible as a successful recommendation)
HL High query specificity
low target specificity
“Find bebop jazz with saxophone, 1950s-60s”
(Many tracks are possible, the query is somewhat specific)
LH Low query specificity
high target specificity
“What was the popular song from a recent musical movie?”
(One or few tracks are possible, the query is not specific)
HH High query specificity
high target specificity
“Windup by Hayoung Lyou, the jazz composer and pianist”
(One track is possible, the query is highly specific)
There are two steps to generate a conversation goal. First, three templates are randomly sampled.
They decide the potential directions, but they are still template candidates, since some of them may
not be plausible per the recommendation pool. For example, the recommendation pool may consist
of all instrumental music, which would limit lyric-based conversations. Second, the three base
conversation goals are fed to the Goal LLM (g goal), whose role is to select the most plausible goal
based on the recommendation pool and customize the overall goal with concrete examples.
To improve conversation pacing and realism, each conversation goal includes a target turn count
that guides the expected resolution time: HH specificity goals target 1-2 turns (quick resolution),
HL specificity targets 3-4 turns (moderate exploration), LL specificity targets 3-7 turns (extensive
exploration), and LH specificity targets 6-8 turns (detailed exploration). The target turn count is
determined by the Goal LLM (g goal) based on goal complexity and recommendation pool content.
While conversations always continue to the full 8 turns for consistent training data, the target turn
count influences the listener’s pacing strategy and goal achievement approach.
Listener LLM and Recsys LLMsBased on the profiling tracks, the conversation goal, and
the listener profile, the conversation is initiated by the Listener LLM (g listener). On Recsys LLM
(grecsys), after being initialized with the listener profile and the recommendation pool (but not the
conversation goal), it starts to respond to the Listener LLM’s initial query. In the subsequent turns
(from Turn 2), the Listener LLM actively engages with the recommended music by listening to
the audio samples and seeing the album artwork before formulating responses. This multimodal
interaction allows the Listener LLM to provide more nuanced and informed feedback about the
recommendations, to which Recsys LLM then makes subsequent recommendations. The Listener
LLM also labels whether the Recsys LLM’s recommendation is making positive progress towards
achieving the goal. This information is expected to be used as a ‘preference’ signal during training
recommendation models using reinforcement learning, or as an auxiliary classification target. Fi-
nally, in every turn, both the Listener and the Recsys LLMs generate ‘thought’ before generating
their response message to each other. A ‘thought’ is used to analyze the input message (from the
other LLM), increasing interpretability during both dataset creation and utilization.
4 TALKPLAYDATA2: STATISTICS ANDEVALUATION
4.1 STATISTICS
Table 4: TalkPlayData 2 statistics
Counts of Training Evaluation
Conversations 15199 1000
Warm Users - 371
Cold Users - 129
Total Users 8591 500
Warm Tracks - 3779
Cold Tracks - 2982
Total Tracks 43597 6761
Table 4 summarizes the key statistics of TalkPlayData 2,
which consists of a 15,199 training set and 1,000 test
set divided using chronological splitting to reflect real-
world deployment scenarios. The test set includes 129
cold users and 2,982 cold tracks for evaluating cold-start
scenarios, while a distinctive characteristic is the com-
prehensive inclusion of user queries, assistant responses,
and detailed thought processes that provide valuable in-
sights into the reasoning behind preferences and recom-
mendations, enabling interpretable music recommendation systems.
6

===== PAGE 7 =====
Table 5: Comparison among conversational music recommendation datasets. Gray text indicates
closed-source datasets. CS refers to cold-start Split.
Dataset Profile Goal Thought CS Conv. Track User Turns
JAMSessions✓ ✗ ✗N/A 112K 100k 104K 1.00
Text2Track✗ ✗ ✗N/A 1M 500K - 1.00
CPCD✗ ✗ ✗ ✗0.1K 107K - 5.70
LP-MusicDialog✗ ✗ ✗ ✗288K 391K - 4.97
TalkPlayData 1✗ ✗ ✗ ✓532K 406K - 6.95
TalkPlayData 2 (Ours)✓ ✓ ✓ ✓16.2K 47K 9k 8.00
Table 5 presents a comparison among conversational music recommendation datasets: including two
closed-source single-turn conversation datasets (Palumbo et al., 2024; Melchiorre et al., 2025), a hu-
man conversation dataset (Chaganty et al., 2023), and two LLM-based synthetic datasets (Doh et al.,
2024; 2025). While TalkPlayData 2 does not have a large number of conversations, it represents the
dataset most similar to real music recommendation scenarios, featuring 1) long conversation turns,
2) user profiles, 3) conversation goals, 4) chain-of-thought, and 5) cold-start splits.
4.2 HUMANEVALUATION
We assess the quality of our generated data through human evaluation, focusing on two key aspects:
1)relevance– determining the alignment between the retrieved music items and the user query, and
2)naturalness– assessing the likelihood of such a conversation occurring in real life. We adhere to
a mean opinion score that uses a 5-point Likert scale. A total of 26 raters evaluated 10 randomly
sampled dialogues each, resulting in 260 total ratings. For comparison models, we select open-
source conversational music recommendation datasets. CPCD (Chaganty et al. (2023)) is a human
conversation dataset about music, and LP-MusicDialog (Doh et al. (2024)) and TalkPlayData 1 (Doh
et al. (2025)) are synthetic conversation datasets generated by a single LLM.
As shown in Table 6, TalkPlayData 2 achieves the highest scores in both dimensions. The high rele-
vance score demonstrates the effectiveness of our multimodal approach, where LLMs consider both
audio and visual aspects of music during recommendation, leading to more accurate and contextu-
ally appropriate suggestions compared to text-only approaches (Doh et al. (2024; 2025)). The strong
naturalness score highlights the effectiveness of our multi-LLM framework. By orchestrating inter-
action between the Conversation Goal LLM and the Profile LLM, the system enables naturalistic
exchanges between the Listener LLM and the RecSys LLM, thereby improving both conversational
coherence and user simulation. These results suggest that our approach of using multiple LLMs
creates more engaging and effective conversational recommendations compared to both human con-
versations (Chaganty et al. (2023)) and single-LLM approaches (Doh et al. (2024; 2025)).
Table 6: Comparison of conversational music recommendation datasets. Type stands for the subject
of conversation. Relevance and Naturalness show Mean Opinion Scores of 5 Likert Scale.
Datasets Type LLMs Multimodal Relevance Naturalness
CPCD Human - - 4.08 4.01
LP-MusicDialog Synthetic 1 x ChatGPT✗3.90 3.95
TalkPlayData 1 Synthetic 1 x Gemini-1.5-Flash✗4.04 4.01
TalkPlayData 2 Synthetic 4 x Gemini-2.5-Flash✓4.11 4.15
4.3 LLM-AS-A-JUDGEEVALUATION
An LLM-as-a-judge evaluation is conducted on its test set to provide a detailed analysis of the design
choices of TalkPlayData 2 (Zheng et al. (2023); Chen et al. (2024)). It plays a crucial role in two
aspects: 1) quality control during dataset generation and 2) a cost-effective alternative to human
evaluation. While human evaluation is considered the gold standard (reported at Section 4.2), it is
often impractical for large conversational datasets due to cost and scale limitations.
7

===== PAGE 8 =====
Table 7: Evaluation Results Summary
Evaluated
Entity Focused Aspect Aggregated
Score
Score
Distribution (1-4)
Conversation Goal Plausibility given recommendation pool 3.93/4
Listener Profile Appropriateness 3.41/4
Chat Element
(Listener)
progress_towards_goal: Label accuracy 3.38/4
thought: Overall quality 3.98/4
message: Linguistic quality 4.00/4
message: Helpfulness towards goal 4.00/4
Chat Element
(RecSys)
thought: Overall quality 3.52/4
track_id: Recommendation quality 3.35/4
message: Linguistic quality 3.69/4
message: Alignment with track 3.83/4
For the judge LLM, Gemini 2.5 Pro is used, which is a more advanced model than the one used
in the generation process. Although the self-referential bias may affect (Wataoka et al., 2024), it
was chosen because the Gemini family is the only available models that supports three modalities
through APIs. For each conversation, multiple calls are made to the judge LLM, each of which
is asked to evaluate a specific aspect of the conversation, with an appropriate instruction, scoring
criteria, and response format. When the track information is needed, the judge LLM is provided
with all the textual, audio, and image data of the tracks as done in the generation process. To further
address this issue, we provide a separate LLM-as-a-judge result that resembles the human evaluation
in subsection 4.2 at the end of this section.
Table 7 summarizes the evaluation results across different aspects of conversation quality. Among
the focused aspects, some of them are simply better to be higher since they would provide informa-
tion used during training, e.g.,progress_towards_goalorthought. Some others are not always the
case: e.g., although we pursue high linguistic quality in TalkPlayData 2, it may be part of the scope
of training a conversational recommendation system that can handle queries with incorrect grammar
and unclear instructions. This is also discussed in the following analysis.
Conversation GoalThis is evaluated on the plausibility of the goal given the recommendation
pool, focusing on the behavior of Goal LLM. The high average score of 3.93/4 indicates the effec-
tiveness of the proposed setup of sample, select, and customize. Additionally, the distributions are
reasonably balanced over the specificity (22%, 34%, 28%, 16%) and the category (9%, 18%, 11%,
11%, 12%, 9%, 11%, 16%, 3%), respectively, along the codes in Table 2 and Table 3.
Listener ProfileThis is evaluated on the appropriateness of the user profile given the profiling
tracks. Its high average score of 3.41/4 indicates that the profile generated by the Profile LLM is
mostly well-aligned with the profiling tracks.
Chat ElementOn the Listener LLM, theprogress_towards_goalis evaluated on its accuracy; if
the Listener LLM’s binary label on whether the recommended track moves the conversation towards
the goal is correct. A high accuracy is desirable, ensuring the credibility ofprogress_towards_goal,
which can be used as user feedback when training an LLM recommendation system. The score of
3.38, with over 75% of the conversations being evaluated as a score of 4.0, ‘Excellent’, indicates
that it is well-labeled. Thethoughtis evaluated on overall quality including coherence, alignment,
helpfulness, and consistency. The high average score of 3.98/4 indicates that the thoughts are well-
written and can be used during training for explanationability, or as a chain-of-thought. Themessage
is evaluated on two orthogonal aspects. First, in its linguistic quality including naturalness, realism,
and consistency, the average LLM judge score is very high – 4.00/4. Second, in its utility (helpful-
ness towards goal), the average score is also 4.00/4. Overall, the Listener LLM’s chat elements are
well-written, and helpful.
On the Recsys LLM, thethoughtis evaluated on overall quality including coherence, alignment,
helpfulness, and consistency. The high average score of 3.52/4 indicates that the thoughts are well-
written and can be used during training for explanationability, or as a chain-of-thought. Thetrack_id
8

===== PAGE 9 =====
is evaluated on its recommendation quality – the relevance between the user query and the recom-
mended track. The score of 3.35/4 indicates in TalkPlayData 2, the Recsys LLM selects highly
relevant items to each query most of the time (score of 4 for 73% ). Themessageis evaluated on two
orthogonal aspects. First, in its linguistic quality including naturalness, realism, and consistency, the
average LLM judge score is 3.69/4, which is slightly lower than the Listener LLM’s score but still
high. Second, in the accuracy of the track information with respect to the recommended track, the
average score is 3.83/4, validating that the Recsys LLM provides accurate track information in its
message most of the time.
4.4 ABLATIONSTUDY ANDCOMPARISON WITHEXISTINGDATASETS
Table 8: KL divergence to uniform (KLDu,↓) and coverage (↑) across ablations.
KLDu (Specificity) KLD u (Topic) Coverage (Specificity) Coverage (Topic)
TalkPlayData 2 0.240 0.110 1.000 1.000
A1: no goal 0.316 0.700 0.750 0.455
A2: no profile 0.553 0.045 0.750 1.000
A3: no goal+profile 0.395 0.451 0.750 0.455
CPCD 1.015 0.727 0.750 0.636
LP-MusicDialog 1.003 1.560 0.500 0.364
TalkPlayData 1 1.386 1.639 0.250 0.364
The goal of the ablation study is to provide empirical evidence that analyzes and supports the design
choices of TalkPlayData 2. The experiments are conducted with three configurations: removing
the conversation goal (A1), the listener Profile (A2), and both (A3). In each configuration, 50
conversations are generated in total, all based on the same base data subset of LFM-2b. Then, an
LLM judge is prompted to classify each conversation into one of the 4 specificities and 11 topics.
We use i) the Kullback–Leibler divergence (KLD) to measure how close the empirical distributions
are to a uniform distribution and ii) Coverage, the proportion of classes that have non-zero items, to
track any potential strong category biases.
As presented in Table 8 (top rows), only the proposed pipeline achieved the full coverage on Speci-
ficity and Topic, as well as the lowestKLD u in Specificity and the second lowestKLD u in Topic.
In detail, first, the overall importance of the goal is clear, based on the significant degradation from
every aspect in A1 and A3. This is expected, since the goal is the only prompt where the Specificity
and the Topic are defined. Second, the impact of the profile is more nuanced, since in A2, the metrics
on the Topic do not indicate any issues, while the diversity of the Specificity shows severe regres-
sion, i.e. the goal alone is enough to generate conversations with diverse topics, but not with diverse
specificities. We conjecture this is due to the close relationship between the Specificity and listener
behaviors, as well as the sequential order that the profile conditions the goal. The profile includes
not only demographics but also open-vocabulary attributes such as preferred musical culture, top
artists, and genres – altogether, seemingly contributing to the diversity of how specific a user would
query and expect; and when there is a lack of such information, the Goal LLM is biased towards
certain specificities.
The KLD and the Coverage are also measured on the existing datasets, as in the bottom rows of
Table 8. In both metrics and the axes, the existing datasets exhibit a low diversity. As mentioned
in section 1, this result reminds the motivation for TalkPlayData 2 – that without diverse prompts,
LLM-based data generation often suffers from a severe mode collapse, shown by the particularly
high KLD values of TalkPlayData 1 and LP-MusicDialog.
5 CONCLUSION
In this paper, we introduced TalkPlayData 2, a new multimodal dataset for conversational recom-
mendation systems. In the data generation pipeline, separate LLM calls are first made to create a
listener profile and a conversation goal for each conversation. Using them as a condition, two sepa-
rate LLMs talk to each other under the role of a music listener and a music recommendation system.
The conversation is conducted for 8 turns, and the data is collected as a conversation. Notably,
9

===== PAGE 10 =====
all the LLMs are multimodal, enabling to generate conversation with multimodal aspects of music
being considered. The LLMs have access to different subsets of the information, a design choice
that is highly similar to the real-world conversational recommendation systems. In the evaluation,
we conducted an LLM-as-a-judge evaluation as well as a human evaluation, which shows that Talk-
PlayData 2 is a promising dataset for training and evaluating conversational music recommendation
systems.
There are still many interesting directions to explore in the future. First, the in-context recommen-
dation of the Recsys LLM has a limitation in the number of tracks it can consider. Expanding its
recommendation pool size is a natural direction. Second, although TalkPlayData 2 consists of highly
natural conversations, it is still limited in various aspects including the speaking style and language.
Third, due to the cost of the LLMs, during the data generation, only a short audio snippet and a
small album cover image are used. Using longer audio and more diverse visual information (such
as music videos, live performances, and any other modalities) can make the data even more deeply
multimodal, enabling holistic multimodal conversational recommendation systems.
REFERENCES
Samee Arif, Sualeha Farid, Abdul Hameed Azeemi, Awais Athar, and Agha Ali Raza. The fellow-
ship of the llms: Multi-agent workflows for synthetic preference optimization dataset generation,
2024. URLhttps://arxiv.org/abs/2408.08688.
Sebastian Böck, Filip Korzeniowski, Jan Schlüter, Florian Krebs, and Gerhard Widmer. Madmom:
A new python audio and music signal processing library. InProceedings of the 24th ACM inter-
national conference on Multimedia, pp. 1174–1178, 2016.
Brandon James Carone, Iran R Roman, and Pablo Ripollés. Evaluating multimodal large language
models on core music perception tasks.arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.22455, 2025a.
Brandon James Carone, Iran R Roman, and Pablo Ripollés. The muse benchmark: Probing music
perception and auditory relational reasoning in audio llms.arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.19055,
2025b.
Arun Tejasvi Chaganty, Megan Leszczynski, Shu Zhang, Ravi Ganti, Krisztian Balog, and Filip
Radlinski. Beyond single items: Exploring user preferences in item sets with the conversational
playlist curation dataset. InProceedings of the 46th International ACM SIGIR Conference on
Research and Development in Information Retrieval, pp. 2754–2764, 2023.
Dongping Chen, Ruoxi Chen, Shilin Zhang, Yaochen Wang, Yinuo Liu, Huichi Zhou, Qihui Zhang,
Yao Wan, Pan Zhou, and Lichao Sun. Mllm-as-a-judge: Assessing multimodal llm-as-a-judge
with vision-language benchmark. InForty-first International Conference on Machine Learning,
2024.
Jianhao Chen, Zishuo Xun, Bocheng Zhou, Han Qi, Hangfan Zhang, Qiaosheng Zhang, Yang Chen,
Wei Hu, Yuzhong Qu, Wanli Ouyang, and Shuyue Hu. Do we truly need so many samples? multi-
llm repeated sampling efficiently scales test-time compute, 2025. URLhttps://arxiv.org/abs/
2504.00762.
Konstantina Christakopoulou, Filip Radlinski, and Katja Hofmann. Towards conversational recom-
mender systems. InProceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowl-
edge discovery and data mining, pp. 815–824, 2016.
Gheorghe Comanici, Eric Bieber, Mike Schaekermann, Ice Pasupat, Noveen Sachdeva, Inderjit
Dhillon, Marcel Blistein, Ori Ram, Dan Zhang, Evan Rosen, et al. Gemini 2.5: Pushing the
frontier with advanced reasoning, multimodality, long context, and next generation agentic capa-
bilities.arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.06261, 2025.
Yashar Deldjoo, Markus Schedl, and Peter Knees. Content-driven music recommendation: Evolu-
tion, state of the art, and challenges.Computer Science Review, 51:100618, 2024.
SeungHeon Doh, Keunwoo Choi, Daeyong Kwon, Taesu Kim, and Juhan Nam. Music discov-
ery dialogue generation using human intent analysis and large language models.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2411.07439, 2024.
10

===== PAGE 11 =====
Seungheon Doh, Keunwoo Choi, and Juhan Nam. Talkplay: Multimodal music recommendation
with large language models.arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.13713, 2025.
Elena V . Epure, Sergio Oramas, Seungheon Doh, Anna Kruspe, and Mohamed Sordo. Music-crs
baselines.https://github.com/nlp4musa/music-crs-baselines, 2025a.
Elena V . Epure, Sergio Oramas, Seungheon Doh, Anna Kruspe, and Mohamed Sordo. Music crs
evaluator.https://github.com/nlp4musa/music-crs-evaluator, 2025b.
Josh Gardner, Simon Durand, Daniel Stoller, and Rachel M Bittner. Llark: A multimodal
instruction-following language model for music.arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.07160, 2023.
Sreyan Ghosh, Arushi Goel, Lasha Koroshinadze, Sang-gil Lee, Zhifeng Kong, Joao Felipe Santos,
Ramani Duraiswami, Dinesh Manocha, Wei Ping, Mohammad Shoeybi, et al. Music flamingo:
Scaling music understanding in audio language models.arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.10289, 2025.
M Goker and Cynthia Thompson. The adaptive place advisor: A conversational recommendation
system. InProceedings of the 8th German workshop on case based reasoning, pp. 187–198,
2000.
Simon Hachmeier and Robert Jäschke. A benchmark and robustness study of in-context-learning
with large language models in music entity detection.arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.11851, 2024.
Byeong-jun Han, Seungmin Rho, Sanghoon Jun, and Eenjun Hwang. Music emotion classification
and context-based music recommendation.Multimedia Tools and Applications, 47(3):433–460,
2010.
Kazuki Hayashi, Yusuke Sakai, Hidetaka Kamigaito, Katsuhiko Hayashi, and Taro Watanabe. To-
wards artwork explanation in large-scale vision language models. InProceedings of the 62nd
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 2024.
Peize He, Zichen Wen, Yubo Wang, Yuxuan Wang, Xiaoqian Liu, Jiajie Huang, Zehui Lei,
Zhuangcheng Gu, Xiangqi Jin, Jiabing Yang, et al. Audiomarathon: A comprehensive bench-
mark for long-context audio understanding and efficiency in audio llms.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2510.07293, 2025.
Dietmar Jannach, Ahtsham Manzoor, Wanling Cai, and Li Chen. A survey on conversational rec-
ommender systems.ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), 54(5):1–36, 2021.
Marius Kaminskas and Francesco Ricci. Contextual music information retrieval and recommenda-
tion: State of the art and challenges.Computer Science Review, 6(2-3):89–119, 2012.
Sonal Kumar, Šimon Sedlá ˇcek, Vaibhavi Lokegaonkar, Fernando López, Wenyi Yu, Nishit Anand,
Hyeonggon Ryu, Lichang Chen, Maxim Pli ˇcka, Miroslav Hlavá ˇcek, et al. Mmau-pro: A chal-
lenging and comprehensive benchmark for holistic evaluation of audio general intelligence.arXiv
preprint arXiv:2508.13992, 2025.
Daeyong Kwon, SeungHeon Doh, and Juhan Nam. Predicting user intents and musical attributes
from music discovery conversations.arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.12254, 2024.
Kuan-Yi Lee, Tsung-En Lin, and Hung-Yi Lee. Audio-maestro: Enhancing large audio-language
models with tool-augmented reasoning.arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.11454, 2025.
Megan Leszczynski, Shu Zhang, Ravi Ganti, Krisztian Balog, Filip Radlinski, Fernando Pereira,
and Arun Tejasvi Chaganty. Talk the walk: synthetic data generation for conversational music
recommendation.arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.11489, 2023.
Chuang Li, Yang Deng, Hengchang Hu, Min-Yen Kan, and Haizhou Li. Incorporating external
knowledge and goal guidance for llm-based conversational recommender systems, 2024a. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.01868.
Dawei Li, Bohan Jiang, Liangjie Huang, Alimohammad Beigi, Chengshuai Zhao, Zhen Tan, Amrita
Bhattacharjee, Yuxuan Jiang, Canyu Chen, Tianhao Wu, et al. From generation to judgment: Op-
portunities and challenges of llm-as-a-judge. InProceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 2757–2791, 2025.
11

===== PAGE 12 =====
Jiajia Li, Lu Yang, Mingni Tang, Cong Chen, Zuchao Li, Ping Wang, and Hai Zhao. The music
maestro or the musically challenged, a massive music evaluation benchmark for large language
models.arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.15885, 2024b.
Janis Libeks and Douglas Turnbull. You can judge an artist by an album cover: Using images for
music annotation.IEEE MultiMedia, 18(4):30–37, 2011.
Ziyang Ma, Yinghao Ma, Yanqiao Zhu, Chen Yang, Yi-Wen Chao, Ruiyang Xu, Wenxi Chen,
Yuanzhe Chen, Zhuo Chen, Jian Cong, et al. Mmar: A challenging benchmark for deep rea-
soning in speech, audio, music, and their mix.arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.13032, 2025.
Gary Marchionini. Exploratory search: from finding to understanding.Communications of the
ACM, 49(4):41–46, 2006.
Alessandro B Melchiorre, Elena V Epure, Shahed Masoudian, Gustavo Escobedo, Anna Hausberger,
Manuel Moussallam, and Markus Schedl. Just ask for music (jam): Multimodal and personalized
natural language music recommendation.arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.15826, 2025.
Adrian North and David Hargreaves.The social and applied psychology of music. OUP Oxford,
2008.
Enrico Palumbo, Gustavo Penha, Andreas Damianou, José Luis Redondo García, Timothy Christo-
pher Heath, Alice Wang, Hugues Bouchard, and Mounia Lalmas. Text2tracks: Generative track
retrieval for prompt-based music recommendation. InThe 1st Workshop on Risks, Opportunities,
and Evaluation of Generative Models in Recommender Systems (ROEGEN@ RECSYS’24), 2024.
Braja Gopal Patra, Dipankar Das, and Sivaji Bandyopadhyay. Retrieving similar lyrics for music
recommendation system. InProceedings of the 14th International Conference on Natural Lan-
guage Processing (ICON-2017), pp. 290–297, 2017.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Tao Xu, Greg Brockman, Christine McLeavey, and Ilya Sutskever.
Robust speech recognition via large-scale weak supervision. InInternational conference on ma-
chine learning, pp. 28492–28518. PMLR, 2023.
Yuri Saito and Takayuki Itoh. Musicube: a visual music recommendation system featuring inter-
active evolutionary computing. InProceedings of the 2011 Visual Information Communication-
International Symposium, pp. 1–6, 2011.
Markus Schedl, Peter Knees, Brian McFee, Dmitry Bogdanov, and Marius Kaminskas. Music rec-
ommender systems.Recommender systems handbook, pp. 453–492, 2015.
Markus Schedl, Peter Knees, Brian McFee, and Dmitry Bogdanov. Music recommendation sys-
tems: Techniques, use cases, and challenges. InRecommender systems handbook, pp. 927–971.
Springer, 2021.
Markus Schedl, Stefan Brandl, Oleg Lesota, Emilia Parada-Cabaleiro, David Penz, and Navid Rek-
absaz. Lfm-2b: A dataset of enriched music listening events for recommender systems research
and fairness analysis. InProceedings of the 2022 Conference on Human Information Interaction
and Retrieval, pp. 337–341, 2022.
Saptarshi Sengupta, Harsh Vashistha, Kristal Curtis, Akshay Mallipeddi, Abhinav Mathur, Joseph
Ross, and Liang Gou. Mag-v: A multi-agent framework for synthetic data generation and verifi-
cation, 2024. URLhttps://arxiv.org/abs/2412.04494.
Yueming Sun and Yi Zhang. Conversational recommender system. InThe 41st international acm
sigir conference on research & development in information retrieval, pp. 235–244, 2018.
Aaron Van den Oord, Sander Dieleman, and Benjamin Schrauwen. Deep content-based music rec-
ommendation.Advances in neural information processing systems, 26, 2013.
Yannis Vasilakis, Rachel Bittner, and Johan Pauwels. Evaluation of pretrained language models on
music understanding.arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.11449, 2024.
12

===== PAGE 13 =====
Michaela Vystr ˇcilová and Ladislav Peška. Lyrics or audio for music recommendation? InPro-
ceedings of the 10th International Conference on Web Intelligence, Mining and Semantics, pp.
190–194, 2020.
Tianchun Wang, Zichuan Liu, Yuanzhou Chen, Jonathan Light, Haifeng Chen, Xiang Zhang, and
Wei Cheng. Diversified sampling improves scaling llm inference, 2025. URLhttps://arxiv.
org/abs/2502.11027.
Koki Wataoka, Tsubasa Takahashi, and Ryokan Ri. Self-preference bias in llm-as-a-judge.arXiv
preprint arXiv:2410.21819, 2024.
Vu Dinh Xuan, Hao V o, David Murphy, and Hoang D. Nguyen. Agentsgen: Multi-agent llm in the
loop for semantic collaboration and generation of synthetic data, 2025. URLhttps://arxiv.org/
abs/2505.13466.
Yongfeng Zhang, Xu Chen, Qingyao Ai, Liu Yang, and W Bruce Croft. Towards conversational
search and recommendation: System ask, user respond. InProceedings of the 27th acm interna-
tional conference on information and knowledge management, pp. 177–186, 2018.
Zijian Zhang, Shuchang Liu, Ziru Liu, Rui Zhong, Qingpeng Cai, Xiangyu Zhao, Chunxu Zhang,
Qidong Liu, and Peng Jiang. Llm-powered user simulator for recommender system. InProceed-
ings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2025.
Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang,
Zi Lin, Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric Xing, et al. Judging llm-as-a-judge with mt-bench and
chatbot arena.Advances in neural information processing systems, 36:46595–46623, 2023.
Ziya Zhou, Yuhang Wu, Zhiyue Wu, Xinyue Zhang, Ruibin Yuan, Yinghao Ma, Lu Wang, Em-
manouil Benetos, Wei Xue, and Yike Guo. Can llms" reason" in music? an evaluation of llms’
capability of music understanding and generation.arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21531, 2024.
13

===== PAGE 14 =====
A ADDITIONALANALYSIS OFTALKPLAY2 DATASET
Generation Cost AnalysisThe generation process utilizes four distinct LLM components with
varying computational requirements. For 1,000 conversation data, the RecSys LLM consumes the
highest token count at 171.9M tokens (66.8% of total), followed by the Listener LLM at 64.7M
tokens (25.1%), Goal LLM at 17.5M tokens (6.8%), and Profile LLM at 3.2M tokens (1.2%). The
multimodal processing follows fixed token allocations: each image consumes 258 tokens (300×300
pixels), and each audio segment consumes 96 tokens (3 seconds at 32 tokens/second). The total
generation cost amounts to $109.08 for 1,000 conversations.
B API SPECIFICATIONS OF THELLMSDURINGGENERATION
During the generation process, the LLM calls consist of many long prompts, defining the task,
behavior, input data, and the response format. In this Appendix, we provide a summary of the
prompt as follows.
B.1 LISTENERPROFILELLM
Input (demographic information and list of text and track entities)
[f"You are an expert in music and demographic analysis. Given the demographic profile below and
tracks, please analyze the tracks and infer the most representative preferred_musical_culture,
artist and genre that define this listener’s taste.",
Demographic Profile:
- age_group: [factual age group]
- country: [factual country]
- gender: [factual gender]
- preferred_language: [factual language]
"Title: [track 1 title], Artist: [track 1 artist], ...", AudioContent, ImageContent, ...
..., "Title: [track 5 title], Artist: [track 5 artist], ...", AudioContent, ImageContent]
Output (YAML block of Listener Profile)
preferred_musical_culture: [most representative musical culture from tracks]
top_1_artist: [most representative artist from tracks]
top_1_genre: [most representative genre from tracks]
B.2 CONVERSATIONGOALLLM
Input (list of text and track entities)
[f"You are an expert in music listening ... Step 1: Analyze the tracks and the provided
conversation goals templates, and select the most appropriate conversation goal ... Step 2:
Generate a new conversation goal that is more specific to the tracks, based on the selected
conversation goal.",
"Title: [track 1 title], Artist: [track 1 artist], ...", AudioContent, ImageContent, ...
..., "Title: [track 32 title], Artist: [track 32 artist], ...", AudioContent, ImageContent,
f"Here are the conversation goal templates, based on which you will generate the new conversation
goal: {{three_conversation_goal_templates}}"]
14

===== PAGE 15 =====
Output (YAML block of Conversation Goal, some are omitted for brevity)
category_code: [alphabetical topic code among A-K]
specificity_code: [one of LL, HL, LH, HH]
target_turn_count: [1-8 based on specificity code]
listener_goal: [customized goal description for the tracks]
listener_expertise: [description of the listener expertise]
initial_query_example_1: [plausible initial query example 1]
B.3 LISTENERLLM (FIRSTTURN)
Input (list of text and track entities)
[f"You are an AI assistant role-playing as a music listener. Your personality, knowledge, and
objectives are STRICTLY defined by the Listener Profile and Conversation Goal provided below.
... For your very first message (Turn 1), ... choose one of the initial query examples provided
in the Conversation Goal and use it ...",
"Title: [profile track 1 title], ...", AudioContent, ImageContent, ...
..., "Title: [profile track 5 title], ...", AudioContent, ImageContent,
f"{{listener_profile}}", f"{{conversation_goal}}",
f"You are starting a new music discovery conversation. ... Turn 1. Now, create ... first turn
query to RecSys ..."]
Output (YAML block of Listener’s First Message)
thought: [internal reasoning about the goal and approach]
message: [natural opening message to the recommendation system]
B.4 RECSYSLLM (FIRSTTURN)
Input (list of text and track entities)
[f"... You are TalkPlay, an expert music recommendation system with deep musical knowledge,
audio analysis capabilities, and image analysis capabilities. ... You MUST recommend
ONLY from the provided available tracks. ... Make personalized music recommendations ...
{{listener_profile}}",
"Title: [pool track 1 title], ... ID: [pool track 1 id], ...", AudioContent, ImageContent, ...
..., "Title: [pool track 32 title], ... ID: [pool track 32 id], ...", AudioContent, ImageContent,
"... Turn 1. ... Listener’s message: {{listener_message}} ... "]
Output (YAML block of Recsys Response)
thought: [analysis of listener’s request and selection reasoning]
track_id: [selected track identifier from the pool]
message: [natural response with track information and explanation]
B.5 LISTENERLLM (SUBSEQUENTTURNS)
Input (list of text and track entities)
[f"Title: [recommended title], Artist: [recommended artist], ... ", AudioContent, ImageContent,
f"You just listened to this recommended track: ... The recommendation system said:
’{{recsys_message}}’ ... Assess whether this track moves you toward achieving your Conversation
Goal ... "]
15

===== PAGE 16 =====
Output (YAML block of Listener’s Response)
thought: [internal evaluation of the track and strategy]
goal_progress_assessment: [MOVES_TOW ARD_GOAL or DOES_NOT_MOVE_TOW ARD_GOAL]
message: [feedback and next request toward the goal]
B.6 RECSYSLLM (SUBSEQUENTTURNS)
Input (list of text and track entities)
[f"... Previous Tracks: {{used_track_ids}} ... Listener’s message: ’{{listener_message}}’ ...",
"... NO DUPLICATES ... Maintain conversation coherence and respond naturally "]
Output (YAML block of Recsys Response)
thought: [analysis of feedback and next recommendation strategy]
track_id: [next selected track identifier]
message: [response with new track and reasoning]
C VALIDATING THELLM-AS-A-JUDGE
C.1 CROSS-DATASETRANKINGCORRELATIONSTUDY
A cross-dataset validation study is conducted to address concerns regarding the reliability of LLM-
as-a-judge and potential self-enhancement bias (Li et al., 2025; Wataoka et al., 2024). In this study,
the judge LLM (Gemini 2.5 Pro) is prompted to evaluate 30 randomly sampled conversations; from
TalkPlayData 2 and the three baseline datasets (CPCD, LP-MusicDialog, TalkPlayData 1). Two
prompts are used to score Relevance and Naturalness, mirroring the human evaluation in subsec-
tion 4.2. The prompts also include requesting to respond with reasoning for its scoring.
Table 9: LLM-as-a-Judge scores on TalkPlayData 2 and baseline datasets on a 4-point Likert scale.
Dataset Relevance Naturalness
CPCD (Human-authored) 3.24 2.50
LP-MusicDialog 2.81 2.78
TalkPlayData 1 3.56 3.73
TalkPlayData 2 3.45 3.56
For Relevance, the LLM-judge’s scores in Table 9 align with the human evaluation in Table 6.
Both humans and the LLM-judge place TPD1, TPD2, and CPCD in a high-quality cluster, and both
identify LP-MusicDialog as the outlier with the lowest relevance. This demonstrates the judge is a
reliable proxy for human perception of recommendation quality.
For Naturalness, the judge’s ranking differs from the human ranking, and in doing so, the result
disproves the concern of self-enhancement and referential bias (Wataoka et al., 2024). The judge
gives the lowest naturalness score (2.50) to the real human-authored dataset (CPCD). A manual
inspection of the judge’s reasoning confirms it is correct to do so by consistently penalizing unnatural
human phrases (e.g., in chat ‘1e6035d..’, it flagged the awkward response “so I know what you are
looking for?” to a user’s query).
The judge’s high score for TalkPlayData 1 (3.73) over TalkPlayData 2 (3.56) can be explained by
the difference in the generation mechanisms. The utterance generation task for TPD1 (connecting
a pre-determined music sequence with conversations) may be a linguistically simpler task, because
a single language model (the Listener) with full information about the music sequence does not
necessarily challenge itself (the Recsys) with impossible queries. Our inspection confirms that the
LLM judge penalized TalkPlayData 2 ’s naturalness score primarily when “the system fails to fulfill
direct user queries."
16

===== PAGE 17 =====
In summary, this study validates our LLM-judge as a reliable evaluator that i) correlates with human
relevance rankings and ii) is a stricter and more holistic critic of naturalness than human raters.
D BASELINES
We present the official baseline results from the Conversational Music Recommendation Challenge
of the EACL 2026 NLP4MusA workshop. 2 The task is defined as a two-stage pipeline: i a Recsys
model retrieves candidate tracks, and ii) an LLM generates a natural language response. The primary
evaluation metric is Normalized Discounted Cumulative Gain (nDCG) at k={1, 10, 20}, averaged
across all conversation turns.
This official baseline result is solely provided by the task organizers and presented with mode details
in Table 10. We present Table 10 only for convenience of the readers and this result should be
referred by Epure et al. (2025a;b).
Table 10: Official Baseline Results for the EACL 2026 Task on the TalkPlayData 2 Test Set (Epure
et al., 2025a;b)
Model nDCG@1 nDCG@10 nDCG@20
Random 0.0000 0.0001 0.0002
Popularity 0.0005 0.0018 0.0024
BERT + Llama-1B 0.0038 0.0142 0.0189
BM25 + Llama-1B 0.0139 0.1015 0.1181
2https://sites.google.com/view/nlp4musa-2026
17